---
title:  "PPP, EAP and the 802.1x standard"
---

# PPP
* PPP = Point-to-Point Protocol
* Embeds an authentication mechanism using username/password
* Primary use: identify the user at the other end of the PPP line before giving them access
* Uses:
    * dial-up Internet access
    * DSL and cable modem authentication for some ISPs in the form of PPP over Ethernet
    * Microsoft's secure remote access solution for Windows 2000 and beyond (part of Layer 2 Tunneling Protocol)

# EAP
* EAP = Extensible Authentication Protocol
* Used inside PPP's authentication protocol
* Provides a general framework for several authentication methods like passwords, challenge-response tokens and public-key infrastructure certificates
* Ensures easy interoperability and compatibility
* Compatible with Ethernet, Token Ring and wireless LANs


# 802.1x
* Standard used to package EAP messages in Ethernet frames without PPP for WLANs
* Terminology:
    * Supplicant: user or client that wants to be authenticated
    * Authentication server: actual server doing the authentication. Usually a RADIUS server
    * Authenticator: device between supplicant and authentication server, such as a wireless AP  
* Most of the work performed by the supplicant and the authentication server. Authenticator doesn't need to be powerful. Especially useful with wireless AP (small and little memory and processing power)
* Use cases:
    * remainder of PPP not needed, for exemple in protocols other than TCP/IP
    * overhead and complexity of using PPP is undesirable
* Principle:
    * an user (supplicant) requests access to an access point (authenticator).
    * access point forces the user's client software into an unauthorized state that allows the client to send only an EAP start message.
    * access point returns an EAP message requesting the user's identity.
    * client returns the identity, which is then forwarded by the access point to the authentication server, which uses an algorithm to authenticate the user and then returns an accept or reject message back to the access point.
    * if accept received, the access point changes the client's state to authorized and normal traffic can now take place.
* EAPOL ?

# Resources and references
* [Brief overview](https://searchmobilecomputing.techtarget.com/definition/8021X)
* [More complete overview](https://www.networkworld.com/article/2216499/security/wireless-what-is-802-1x.html)
