---
layout: page
title:  "Intel x86 architecture"
permalink: "x86.html"
tags: [architectures]
summary: "Various information about the famous Intel x86 architecture"
---


## Registers
### General purpose registers (registres généraux ou de travail)
* 4 16-bits registers: AX, BX, CX and DX
* Can be split in two 8-bits registers: AL/AH. AX = AL + 265*AH
* Can be extended to 32-bits: EAX, EBX, ...
* Higher 16 bits of an extended register (EAH) not directly accessible
* Although gneeral, some compilers have specific conventions for the use of these
  registers
* EXC often used as a counter in loops
* EAX often used to return the value from a subroutine

### Offset registers (registres pointeurs ou d'offset)
* Contain a value representing an offset to be combined with a segment address
* 16-bits registers which can also be extended to 32-bits using the 'E' prefix
* Can't be decomposed as high or low 8-bits registers
* DI: Destination Index. Mostly used for operations on string. Usually associated
with the DS segment register (can also be used with the ES segment register).
Also used to access memory blocks.
* SI: Source Index. Used for operations on strings. Associated with the DS
segment register. Can also be used to access memory blocks.
* BP: Base Pointer. Used to access variables on the stack. Associated with the
SS segment register
* SP: Stack Pointer). Used to access the stack. Associated with the
SS segment register to point to the last element of the stack
* IP: Instruction Pointer. Points to the next instruction to execute. Associated
with the CS segment register. Can't be directly modified. Indirectly modified by
jump instructions, subroutines and interruptions

### Segment registers
* Used to store the beginning address of a segment. 16-bits registers only.
* Address composed of two 32-bits (or 16-bits, depending on the process mode)
 parts: 1st part=segment, 2nd part=offset
* 16-bits addressing used only in real mode. In this mode the processor can't
access blocks of size greater than 16-bits
* CS: Code Segment. Points to the address of the first instruction of the program
* SS: Stack Segment. Points on the stack
* DS: Data segment. Contains the address of the beginning of the data of the
program
* ES: Extra Segment. Used by default by some block copy instructions.
Else, free usage
* FS and GS: additional segment registers. Use similar to ES



### EFLAGS flag register (16-bits)

| Bit number | Code | Interpretation |
|:-:|:-:|:-:|:-:|
| 1 | CF (Carry Flag)       | Set when result too large/small for the destination. Else cleared |
| 3 | PF (Parity Flag)      | |
| 5 | AF (Auxiliary Flag)   | |
| 7 | ZF (Zero Flag)        | Cleared if non-zero result |
| 8 | SF (Sign Flag)        | Set for negative results, cleared for positive ones |
|   | TF (Trap Flag)        | If set, execute only one instruction at a time |


## Processor modes
### Real mode
### Protected mode


## Calling convention
### Microsoft x64
* RCX, RDX, R8, R9 for the first four integer or pointer arguments
* XMM0, XMM1, XMM2, XMM3 are used for floating point arguments
* Additional arguments are pushed onto the stack (right to left)
* Integer return values (similar to x86) are returned in RAX if 64 bits or less
* Floating point return values are returned in XMM0
* RAX, RCX, RDX, R8, R9, R10, R11 are considered volatile (caller-saved)
* RBX, RBP, RDI, RSI, RSP, R12, R13, R14, and R15 are considered nonvolatile (callee-saved)


### System V AMD64 ABI
* First six integer or pointer arguments are passed in registers RDI, RSI, RDX, RCX, R8, R9
* XMM0, XMM1, XMM2, XMM3, XMM4, XMM5, XMM6 and XMM7 are used for certain floating point arguments
* Additional arguments are passed on the stack
* Integral return values up to 64 bits in size are stored in RAX while values up to 128 bit are stored in RAX and RDX
* Floating-point return values are similarly stored in XMM0 and XMM1
* RBX, RBP, and R12–R15 must be preserved by the callee


## Resources and references
* [Calling conventions on Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/X86_calling_conventions#List_of_x86_calling_conventions)
